---
title: "Falafels"
excerpt: "One of the most diverse foods we make. Throw in salads, wraps, sauces."
category: [Vegan]
date: "2019-07-22"
---

Makes around 15-20 balls.

## Ingredients

- 1 brown onion, finely chopped
- 1 bunch fresh parsley, chopped
- 1/2 tbsp salt
- 1/2 tbsp ground cumin
- 1/2 tsp black pepper
- 1 tsp ground coriander
- 1/2 tsp ground chilli
- 4 crushed garlic cloves
- 2 x cans chickpeas (drained and dried using a towel)
- 3 tbsp chickpea flour

## Instructions

Prep…  

1. Add the brown onions, fresh parsley, and spices into a blender and mix until a paste.
2. Add the chickpeas and chickpea flour to the blender and pulse until it’s to a texture where most the chickpeas are blended and some are still visible (adds texture).
3. Ideally, put in the fridge for one hour to solidify to make it easier to work with later.
4. Using a tablespoon, scoop the mixture into small balls. About the size of a large date or the stone of a peach.

To cook in the oven…  

1. Add to a baking tray. You may wish to add baking parchment to stop them sticking.
2. Brush a small amount of oil over all of them.
3. Put in the oven for around 30 minutes at 180C (fan assisted). Maybe longer, you’ll need to check. They should start to brown on the outside. You may want to turn them halfway although not necessary, especially if you’re using baking parchment.

To fry…  

1. Add lots of oil to a medium heat pan. Ideally, they’d be deep-fried but we don’t want to send ourselves to an early grave.
2. Add the falafel in batches. Don’t add too many because you need space to flip them.
3. Cook for a few minutes and then flip. They should become crispy on the outside.
4. Once cooked, add to a bowl with a paper towel to take away some of the oil.
